(dramatic music)
- [Derek] A single sentence
in one of the oldest math books
held the key to
understanding our universe.
Euclid's "Elements" has been
published in more editions
than any other book except the Bible.
It was the go to math
text for over 2,000 years.
But for all that time,
mathematicians were
skeptical of a single line
which seemed like a mistake.
Ultimately, some of the
greatest math minds realized
that Euclid wasn't wrong after all,
but there was more to the story.
Slight tweaks to this line
opened up strange new universes
out of nothing.
Surprisingly, 80 years later,
we found out those strange new universes
are core to understanding
our own universe.
(contemplative music)
Around 300 BC,
the Greek mathematician, Euclid,
takes on a massive project
to summarize all mathematics
known at the time,
to essentially create the one book
that contains everything
that everyone knows about mathematics.
But that's no easy task.
See, before Euclid, there was
a bit of a problem with math.
- People would prove things,
but they would just be
going around in circles.
"Why does a triangle have 180 degrees?"
"'Cause if you take two parallel lines -"
"Yeah, but why do parallel lines exist?"
"Oh, that's because you can make a square.
"Why does a square exist?"
You have this infinite recursion
of what the fundamental reason
why something is true is.
- [Derek] It's kind of
like in the dictionary,
every word is defined
in terms of other words,
so how do you get to ground truth?
Euclid used a solution that
was pioneered by the Greeks.
Let's just accept a few of
the most simple, basic things
as being true, these are our postulates.
Then, based upon these postulates,
we can prove theorems one at a time,
building up our math using logic,
so that as long as those
first statements are true,
then everything else
that follows from them
must definitely be true.
He had perfected the gold standard
for rigorous mathematical proof
that all modern math relies on.
Euclid used this method
when he published his 13 book
series called, "The Elements,"
in which he proved 465 theorems,
covering almost all of
mathematics known at the time,
including geometry and number theory.
And all these theorems depended
on were some definitions,
a few common notions, and five postulates.
- We go right to book one,
and book one starts with definitions,
you gotta start somewhere.
And the definition is,
"A point is that which has no part.
A line is a breadthless length."
And, "The ends of lines are points."
By line, he really means a curve,
and then it has some ends.
"A straight line is a
line that lies evenly
within the points on itself."
And then so on, and so forth.
He's got 23 definitions,
then he's got the five postulates.
(energetic music)
- [Derek] The first four are simple.
One, if you have two points,
you can draw a straight line between them.
Two, if you have a straight line,
you can extend it indefinitely.
Three, given a center and a
radius, you can draw a circle.
And the fourth is that all right angles
are equal to each other.
- [Alex] But postulate
five gets the big guns.
- [Derek] Which is that,
if a straight line falling
on two straight lines
makes the interior angles on the same side
less than two right angles,
the two straight lines,
if produced indefinitely,
meet on that side,
on which are the angles less
than the two right angles.
- What the hell is he talking about?
That's a postulate?
Like all of these are,
you know, half of a sentence,
and they're all blatantly obvious.
And then comes five, out of left field,
and it's like an entire paragraph.
What is he doing?
(contemplative music)
- [Derek] This made
mathematicians suspicious;
it seemed like Euclid made a mistake.
Greek philosopher Proclus
thought Postulate 5
ought even to be struck outta
the postulates altogether,
for it is a theorem.
But if it's a theorem,
we should be able to prove it
from the first four postulates,
so that's what many people tried.
Some, including Ptolemy and Proclus,
believed they had
succeeded, but they hadn't.
In fact, all they'd managed to do
was just restate Postulate
5 in different words.
Here's one formulation.
If you have a line, and a
point that is not on that line,
then there is a single unique line
which will be parallel to the first line.
For this reason,
the fifth postulate is often
called the Parallel postulate.
(contemplative music)
When the method of direct proof failed,
other mathematicians, including
al-Haytham and Omar Khayyam,
tried a different approach,
proof by contradiction.
The idea is simple,
you keep the first four
postulates the same,
but assume that the
fifth postulate is false.
Then you use those new
postulates to prove theorems,
and if that leads to a contradiction,
for example, true equals false,
well, then it means your new
fifth postulate must be wrong.
And, therefore, the only
remaining option would be
that Euclid's version of the
fifth postulate is correct,
and you would've proven
the fifth postulate.
So, what would it look like
if the fifth postulate were false?
Well, according to Euclid,
through a point not on a line,
there could only be one line
that is parallel to the first.
One alternative is that
there are no parallel lines
that you could draw through that point.
- Well, people tried that,
and they realized that thin lines
had to be finite in length.
And they're like, "Well, that can't be."
- [Derek] So this option was ruled out,
it contradicted the second postulate,
which states that lines can
be extended indefinitely.
The other alternative
is that you can draw more
than one parallel line
through a point not on the first line.
- So that's what they would do,
they would assume the
postulate five fails,
and they're like,
"This has gotta be wrong.
Where's the contradiction?"
They couldn't find the contradiction.
(intense acoustic music)
- [Derek] So proof by
contradiction also failed.
In total, mathematicians
spent more than 2,000 years
trying to prove the fifth postulate,
but everyone who tried failed.
(contemplative music)
Then, around 1820, János
Bolyai, a 17 year old student,
started spending his days and
nights working on the mystery.
His father became worried,
and he wrote to his son,
"You must not attempt this
approach to parallels.
I know this way to the very end,
I have traversed this bottomless night,
which extinguished all
light and joy in my life.
I intrigue you, leave the
science of parallels alone.
Learn from my example."
But the young Bolyai didn't
listen to his father,
he could not leave the
science of parallels alone.
After years of work,
he realized that maybe the fifth postulate
can't be proven from the other four,
it could be completely independent.
(soft music)
See, according to Euclid,
you could have only one
parallel line through a point.
But Bolyai imagined a world
where there could be more
than one parallel line
through that point.
But how?
Well, who said you needed
to have a flat surface?
On a surface that is curved like this,
you can draw more than one line
that is parallel to the original line.
But wait a second, those
lines don't look straight.
Well, what makes straight lines special
is that they're the shortest
paths between two points.
On this surface, those
shortest paths just look bent,
because the surface is curved.
Here's a more familiar example.
Airplanes always try to
fly the shortest path
between two cities,
they're basically flying
in a straight line,
but that line doesn't
look straight on a map
because the surface is curved.
These shortest paths on curved surfaces
are called geodesics.
So, all these lines are straight,
they just don't look it,
because the world Bolyai had imagined
turned out to be curved.
We now know this as hyperbolic geometry.
- You know, when I used to
think of the hyperbolic plane,
I would just imagine
it as one giant saddle.
But that's not really what it is,
the hyperbolic plane is much more like
this piece of crocheting.
So, it starts out pretty
flat and even in the middle,
but as you move outwards,
more and more fabric is created,
and that would push parallel lines apart.
And the further and further out you go,
the amount of fabric grows exponentially,
and that ends up causing
this crumpling effect.
So if you really wanna think
about the hyperbolic plane,
I think you've gotta think about
saddles, on saddles, on saddles,
like it's a infinite crumpling mess.
(soft music)
- [Derek] But that little piece of crochet
isn't the full hyperbolic plane.
To show that, we need to make a map,
one that fits the entire
plane into a disc.
To show how this works,
we're gonna fill the entire
plane with these triangles.
Starting in the middle,
just as with the crochet,
things look pretty normal,
but as you go farther out from the center,
you get all this extra space,
so you can fit more and more triangles.
So they appear smaller,
but they are actually the same size.
Now, since the hyperbolic
plane is infinite,
you can keep adding triangles forever,
and they all need to fit on the disk.
So as you get closer to the edge,
the triangles will appear
smaller, and smaller, and smaller,
infinitely smaller, never ending,
and you can never quite reach the edge.
This is known as the Poincare Disk Model.
Here, straight lines are arcs of circles
that intersect the disc at 90 degrees,
and just like on our original shape,
a straight line down the
middle appears straight,
while straight lines next
to it appear to curve away.
What's remarkable is that
Bolyai didn't have a model
of hyperbolic geometry yet,
he was just drawing Euclidean
triangles with the assumption
that Euclid's fifth postulate didn't hold.
And while Bolyai found
that the behavior in hyperbolic geometry
is very different than Euclid's,
mathematically, it seemed
just as consistent.
(soft music)
In 1823, the 20-year-old
János wrote to his dad,
"I have discovered such wonderful
things that I was amazed.
Out of nothing, I have created
a strange new universe."
(contemplative music)
But Bolyai had been doing more
than just tackling ancient math mysteries.
In his twenties, he joined the army,
where he continued developing
two of his other passions,
playing the violin and dueling.
He had mastered both,
but with a sword in
particular, he was unmatched.
Perhaps because of his many
talents, Bolyai grew arrogant,
and found it difficult to accept authority
from his superiors.
That made him hard to get along with.
This reached a peak when,
during one of his deployments,
13 cavalry officers from his garrison
challenged him to a duel.
Bolyai accepted their challenge,
on the condition that
after every two duels,
he could play for a little
while on his violin.
Bolyai fought each of them in succession,
winning all 13 duels,
and leaving behind all his
adversaries on the square.
While Bolyai loved dueling,
his first love was still mathematics.
In 1832,
9 years after he discovered
his strange new universe,
he published his findings
as a 24 page appendix
to his father's textbook.
Extremely proud and excited
about his son's work,
Farkas Bolyai sent it
to perhaps the greatest
mathematician of all time,
Carl Friedrich Gauss.
After careful examination,
Gauss replied a few months later,
"To praise it would
amount to praising myself
for the entire content of the work
coincides almost exactly
with my own meditations,
which have occupied my mind
for the past 30 or 35 years."
(soft music)
Years earlier, Gauss had
wandered a similar path.
In 1824, he wrote a private
letter to one of his friends,
in which he describes
discovering a curious geometry,
one with paradoxical,
and to the uninitiated,
absurd theorems.
For example, Gauss writes,
"The three angles of a triangle
become as small as one wishes,
if only the sides are taken large enough.
Yet the area of the triangle
can never exceed a definite limit."
In other words,
you can have a triangle
that's infinitely long,
but the area is finite.
You can see why by using
the Poincare disk model.
A small triangle looks pretty ordinary,
but as you make it bigger,
the angles start to become
smaller and smaller.
Eventually, all those angles go to zero,
because all these lines
intersect the disk at 90 degrees.
Now, these lines are infinitely long,
but because of the geometry,
the area is finite.
In the same private letter, Gauss wrote,
"All my efforts to
discover a contradiction
and inconsistency in this
non-Euclidean geometry
have been without success."
Just like Bolyai, Gauss had
found that this geometry
seemed thoroughly consistent.
He named it non-Euclidean geometry,
a name that stuck.
It describes geometries
where Euclid's first four postulates hold,
but the fifth doesn't.
But Gauss decided not
to publish his findings
for fear of ridicule.
This aversion to a
different kind of geometry
should at least be a little surprising,
because there is one other geometry
that we should be very familiar
with, spherical geometry,
since we all live on a sphere.
(soft music)
On a sphere, straight lines
are parts of great circles,
these are the circles
with the largest possible circumference.
On Earth, the equator,
and circles of longitude,
are examples of great circles,
and we can use this to see
how straight lines behave.
These lines seem to go
in the same direction,
but as you keep extending them,
you find that they intersect once,
and then again on the
other side of the earth.
And this will always happen
for any two great circles,
because they must each
have the largest possible circumference,
so, on a sphere, there
are no parallel lines.
Gauss had long been fascinated
by spherical geometry.
He was also a geodesist,
and frequently took
measurements of the Earth.
In the 1820s,
he was tasked with surveying
the Kingdom of Hanover
to help make a map.
As part of this survey,
he climbed the mountains near Gottingen.
With the help of people
situated on other landmarks,
they were able to carefully
measure the angles
of several triangles,
which would then be used
to determine the position
of one place relative to another.
As a reference for the survey,
and to help determine the
roundness of the Earth,
they also precisely measured
the angles of a large triangle
formed by three mountains.
But for all of Gauss' romantic notions
of taking measurements
on top of mountains,
(contemplative music)
he was not the kindest correspondent.
When Bolyai received his hero's response,
he was devastated,
believing that Gauss was
trying to undermine him
and steal his ideas.
He was so embittered by Gauss' response
that he never published again.
In 1848, Bolyai had to
endure another hardship
when he found out that
Russian mathematician,
Nikolai Lobachevsky,
had independently discovered
non-Euclidean geometry,
several years before Bolyai had published
his 24 page long appendix.
When Bolyai died in 1860,
he left behind 20,000 pages
of unpublished mathematical manuscripts.
He would not know
that Gauss did independently discover
non-Euclidean geometry,
nor would he know, that
upon receiving the appendix,
Gauss had written to a friend,
"I regard this young geometer, Bolyai,
as a genius of the first order."
(soft music)
While Bolyai was embittered,
non-Euclidean geometries
continued to develop.
Until 1854, spherical geometry
wasn't actually considered
a non-Euclidean geometry.
That's because, on a sphere,
lines can't be extended indefinitely.
This is what earlier
mathematicians had stumbled upon,
and therefore dismissed this geometry,
since Euclid's second
postulate wouldn't hold.
But in 1854,
Riemann changed the second postulate
from an infinite extension
to something that is, quote, "unbounded,"
so that the second postulate
still holds on a sphere.
With this change,
spherical geometry became
another valid non-Euclidean geometry.
By using the generalized four postulates,
and taking the fifth as there
being no parallel lines,
you could now derive spherical
or elliptic geometry.
Would you consider the
fifth postulate a mistake?
Would it have been better if
he just never wrote that down?
- If he never wrote that down,
he would've stunted his geometry,
'cause he wouldn't be able to prove
a lot of things that he claimed to have.
It's beautiful that he wrote this.
It's beautiful that
people spent 2,000 years
trying to refute him,
only to discover that,
in fact, he was right
in writing this in the first place.
- [Derek] So, while Euclid was right
to write down the fifth postulate,
he did make a different mistake.
- So here's the problem
with what Euclid was doing.
Definition 1, "A point is
that which has no part."
What does it mean to have a part?
What is a part?
What does it mean not to have a part?
"A line is a breadthless length."
What does it mean to have breadth?
Lying evenly within itself,
within the points on itself?
What the hell is he talking about?
We read this two minutes ago,
and we were nodding along like,
"Yeah, completely makes
sense what he's saying."
It's all nonsense.
Don't give me a definition
that's gonna have an infinite recursion.
If you give me a definition
in terms of other things,
then you have to tell me
what those things are.
If you tell me what that is,
you have to tell me what
the thing before it is.
- Are the definitions a bad idea?
- You shouldn't have definitions,
you should have undefined terms.
I'm not gonna tell you what a point is,
I'm not gonna tell you what a line is,
I'm not gonna tell you what a plane is.
All I'm gonna tell you is
what the postulates are
that they're assumed to satisfy.
It's the relationships between
the objects that's important,
not the definitions of
the objects themselves.
And once you free your
mind to that possibility,
all of a sudden,
you realize that there's a
perfectly good geometric world
in which, by line, you mean great circle,
and by plane, you mean sphere,
and by point, you mean
a point on a sphere,
and then four of those
axioms are satisfied,
just not the fifth.
And similarly, there's another model,
something called a disk
model for hyperbolic space,
which, the disk is the plane.
What I mean by straight lines
is arcs of circles that
are orthogonal to the disk,
and then points are
points inside the disk.
And the disk is the plane.
- [Derek] See, you can
think of geometry as a game.
(thoughtful music)
The first four postulates
are like the minimum rules
required to play that game,
and then the fifth postulate
selects the world that you'll play in.
If you pick that there
are no parallel lines,
you're playing in spherical geometry.
If you choose one parallel line,
you're playing in flat geometry.
And if you go for more
than one parallel line,
then you're playing in
hyperbolic geometry.
But Riemann decided to
take it one step further.
Instead of selecting just
one world to play in,
why not combine them all into one?
During his inaugural speech in 1854,
he laid out the groundwork for a geometry
where the curvature could
differ from place to place.
One part might be flat,
another part might be slightly curved,
and yet another part might
have a very strong curvature.
And this geometry wouldn't be limited
to two-dimensional planes either,
it could be extended to
three or more dimensions.
(contemplative music)
Another breakthrough came in 1868,
when Eugenio Beltrami unequivocally proved
that hyperbolic and spherical geometry
were just as consistent
as Euclid's flat geometry.
That is, if there were any inconsistencies
in hyperbolic or spherical geometry,
then they must also be present
in Euclid's flat geometry.
The prospects for these new
geometries were looking great.
And it turns out, this
was just the beginning.
(soft music)
In 1905, Einstein proposed the
special theory of relativity,
which is based on just two postulates.
One, "The laws of physics are the same
in all inertial frames of reference."
And two, "The speed of light in a vacuum
is the same for all inertial observers."
So, as a result, space
and time must be relative.
But that created a problem
for Newtonian gravity,
because, according to Newton,
the force of gravity is
inversely proportional
to the distance between
the two objects squared.
But in Einstein's special relativity,
that distance is no longer well-defined.
In whose reference frame are we measuring?
And so Einstein had to
find a way to reconcile
relativity and gravity.
Two years later, in 1907,
Einstein had the happiest
thought of his life,
he imagined a man falling
off the roof of a house.
And what made Einstein so joyful
is that he realized that
while the man is falling,
he would feel absolutely weightless,
and if he let go of an object,
it would just remain in
uniform motion relative to him.
It would be just like being
in space, not near any masses,
floating around in a spaceship
at constant velocity.
And that is an inertial observer.
Now, here's the big breakthrough,
Einstein realized that
they're not just similar,
they are identical,
because there is no
experiment you could do
to determine whether you're in free fall
in a uniform gravitational field,
or whether you are in deep space,
not near any massive objects.
And so the free-falling man too
must be an inertial observer,
meaning he is not accelerating,
and he's not experiencing
any force of gravity.
But if gravity is not a force,
then how do you explain things
like the space station orbiting Earth?
Shouldn't it just fly
off in a straight line?
Well, astronauts in the space
station also feel weightless.
And that's the key,
it feels just as if they're
traveling at constant velocity
in a straight line.
It feels like that
because that's precisely
what they're doing,
they're traveling in a straight line.
How, then, could that
straight line appear curved
to a distant observer?
The answer is,
because the space time that
straight line is on is curved.
See, massive objects curve spacetime,
and objects moving
through curved spacetime
will follow the shortest path
through that curved geometry,
the geodesic.
So, while astronauts in the space station
are following a straight line,
it appears curved to a distant observer
because the Earth curves
the spacetime around it.
So, the behavior of straight
lines in curved geometries
is core to understanding
the universe we live in.
And in the more than a hundred
years since it was published,
the general theory of relativity
has been remarkably successful.
(soft music)
In 2014, astronomers briefly
observed a supernova,
a violent and extremely
bright death of a star.
In fact, they saw the exact same supernova
in four different places.
How?
Well, in between the supernova and earth,
there was a massive galaxy,
which curved space time,
so light from the supernova,
which was spreading out in all directions,
had several different
paths to reach the earth,
and four of those reached Earth
at approximately the same time.
The galaxy had functioned as
a massive gravitational lens.
The astronomers realized that
other galaxies in the cluster
might also lens the light
from that supernova,
but with different path lengths
and gravitational potentials,
so the light would reach
earth at different times.
After careful modeling,
they predicted that
they should see a replay
of that supernova just a year later.
And on the 11th of December, 2015,
just as predicted, they saw
the same supernova once more.
In addition to being able
to observe the effects
of curved spacetime,
we can now even measure the
ripples of space time itself,
gravitational waves
formed by cosmic events,
far, far away,
like the merger of black holes.
And according to a recent
survey by NANOGrav,
the fabric of spacetime
seems to be buzzing
with the remnants of grand cosmic events.
In the hundred years since
general relativity was published,
countless findings have
supported its predictions,
and at its very core are
the curved geometries
of Bolyai and Riemann.
But so far, all the
effects we've looked at
are local distortions of spacetime.
What is the shape of the entire universe?
(stars whooshing)
(contemplative music)
Using the differences
between the geometries,
we can find that out too.
In flat geometry,
we expect all the angles of a triangle
to add up to 180 degrees without fail.
But in spherical geometry,
the angles don't add up to
180 degrees, but to more.
Similarly in hyperbolic geometry,
the angles add up to
less than 180 degrees.
So, to determine the
shape of the universe,
you just need to measure
the angles of a triangle.
And measuring a triangle is
precisely what Gauss was doing
200 years ago.
In fact, this led some to speculate
that he was actually trying
to measure the curvature
of space itself.
The angle he found,
180 degrees, within observational error.
But that shouldn't be very surprising.
Take this balloon, for example,
which approximates a sphere.
If I draw a small triangle on it,
well, the surface I'm
drawing on is basically flat,
so the angles inside the triangle
will add up to essentially 180 degrees.
Only if I make the triangle large enough
will the effects of
curvature come into play,
and then the angles in the triangle
will add up to more than 180 degrees.
And this was the problem
with Gauss' experiment,
even if he was trying
to measure the curvature
of space itself, for which
there is no solid evidence,
the triangle he measured
would've been far too small
relative to the size of the universe.
(ball thudding)
(soft music)
So, in order to overcome the scale issue
that Gauss encountered,
we need to scale the triangles
formed between mountains
up to the largest triangles we can.
And since looking further and further away
is the same as looking
further back in time,
we need to look back as far as possible,
to the very first light we can see,
the Cosmic Microwave Background, or CMB,
a picture from when the universe
was just 380,000 years old.
While the CMB is almost
completely uniform,
there are some spots that are
slightly hotter or colder.
Now, we know how far away the CMB is,
so if we can figure out
how large such a spot is,
then we can draw a cosmic triangle.
It's thought that the first density
and temperature variations
originated from quantum fluctuations
in the very early universe,
which were then blown up
as the universe expanded.
But due to this rapid expansion,
not all regions were in causal
contact with each other.
So, using the information we have
of how the early universe evolved,
astronomers can predict how
often spots of different sizes
should appear in the CMB.
This is what this power spectrum shows,
essentially a histogram of how often
each spot size should occur
if the universe is flat.
So now we have something to
compare our measurement to.
If the universe is flat,
the angle we measure on the sky
should be the same as we'd expect.
But if the universe is
curved like a sphere,
the angles of the triangle should add up
to more than 180 degrees,
so the angle we'd measure
would be larger than predicted,
and this peak would shift to the left.
Similarly, if the universe
has hyperbolic geometry,
then spots should appear
smaller than predicted,
and this peak would shift to the right.
So, what do we measure?
This is the data from the Plank mission,
which is almost exactly what you'd expect
if the universe were flat.
This mission also gives us
the current best estimate
for the curvature of the universe,
which is 0.0007, plus minus 0.0019.
So that's basically zero
within the margin of error.
So we're fairly certain
that the universe we live in is flat.
But living in a flat universe
seems to be remarkably serendipitous.
(contemplative music)
Right now, the average mass energy density
comes down to the equivalent
of about six hydrogen atoms
per cubic meter.
If, on average, that was
just one more hydrogen atom,
the universe would've been
more spherically curved.
If there were just one less,
the curvature would be
hyperbolic geometry.
And so far, we're not
entirely sure why the universe
has the mass energy density it has.
What we do know is that general relativity
is one of our best physical
theories of reality,
and at the very heart of it,
are those paradoxical and
seemingly absurd geometries,
ones we found because mathematicians
spent over 2,000 years
thinking about a single sentence
from the world's most famous math text.
(high-tech blooping)
When it comes to human brilliance,
it's not just what you know,
it's also how you think,
and a great way to improve how you think
is by building your knowledge
and problem solving skills.
So if you're looking
for a free and easy way
to do just that,
then check out this video's
sponsor, brilliant.org.
With Brilliant,
you can master key concepts
in everything from math and data science
to programming and technology.
All you have to do is set your goal,
and Brilliant will design the
perfect learning path for you,
giving you all the tools
you need to reach it.
Want to follow in the
footsteps of Euclid and Bolyai?
Then Brilliant's latest
course, Measurement,
is the perfect addition to
your problem solving toolkit.
The course takes you on a tour
through the essentials of geometry,
getting you hands-on with concepts
to help sharpen your
spatial reasoning skills.
A solid foundation in geometry
can be a launchpad to
hundreds of applications,
everything from computer graphics
and data clustering in AI algorithms
to understanding Einstein's
theory of general relativity.
Beyond measurement,
Brilliant has a huge
library of things to learn.
But what I love most about Brilliant
is that they connect what you
learn to real world examples.
And because each lesson is
hands-on, you'll build intuition,
so you can put what you've
learned to good use.
To try everything Brilliant has to offer
for free for a full 30 days,
visit brilliant.org/veritasium,
or click that link down
in the description.
For the first 200 of you,
you'll get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
So, I wanna thank Brilliant
for sponsoring this video,
and I wanna thank you for watching.